---
layout: posts
title: Learning p5.js
date: 2018-03-29 14:00 -0600
---

Okay! It's been REALLY long that I have put on a blog, and that's totally because I didn't have the time.  
I was busy writing codes for my college club App Team NITH, and building my own project for Hackathon which was conducted on 24th and 25th March.  
I couldn't reveal info about any of these projects since they weren't my side projects. In these days I realised how much I love my own side projects.

So I'm learning the p5.js library, and I must admit I suddenly feel a little unsure about this since I just googled JS libraries and it shows React, Node as
important libraries to study but there's absolutely no sign of p5.js. Obviously it's a designing library, so it's not that important.  
But still, I have dreamed a lot about creating awesome web pages, so I'm still going with my decision.

Now, I have opened the documentation of p5.js.  
I'm not downloading the p5 library, I'm only going to reference it through their cloudflare link.

><script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/p5.js/0.6.0/p5.js"></script>

Now I have two options, I can either read all reference topics on the p5 official website, or I can code together with The Coding Train guide on p5.
Now the problem with the obviously interesting solution is that the beginner videos on Coding Train are too basic and they bore me out. It's better that I learn
from coding challenges only.
So let's begin!

I had already watched this [Clock with p5.js](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E4RyStef-gY) video, so it'll be kind of a revision.  
I'm not going to copy the code what he teaches, obviously.
Let's first try my hand with whatever I remember.
He used a minute(),hour() function, then he used an arc() function and within it, he used the map() function.
Hmm, what's a map function?

```
Re-maps a number from one range to another.

Syntax:
map(value,start1,stop1,start2,stop2,[withinBounds])


Parameters
value 	Number: the incoming value to be converted
start1 	Number: lower bound of the value's current range
stop1 	Number: upper bound of the value's current range
start2 	Number: lower bound of the value's target range
stop2 	Number: upper bound of the value's target range
withinBounds 	Boolean: constrain the value to the newly mapped range

Returns
Number: remapped number
```
For a coded example of its usage, [here you go](https://p5js.org/reference/#/p5/map)

So first let's test the hour and minute and seconds function.  
The setup function is called only once and the draw function is called repeatedly. So I need to use
the time functions in the draw function. Now the question is, how do I display it, simply in the form of text first?

The function I'm looking for is text().
```
Description

Draws text to the screen. Displays the information specified in the first parameter on the screen in the position specified by the additional parameters. A default font will be used unless a font is set with the textFont() function and a default size will be used unless a font is set with textSize(). Change the color of the text with the fill() function. Change the outline of the text with the stroke() and strokeWeight() functions.

Syntax
text(str,x,y,[x2],[y2])

Parameters
str 	String|Object|Array: the alphanumeric symbols to be displayed
x 	Number: x-coordinate of text
y 	Number: y-coordinate of text
x2 	Number: by default, the width of the text box, see rectMode() for more info
y2 	Number: by default, the height of the text box, see rectMode() for more info
```

Hmm, now I see that Daniel has used a function called noStroke().

```
Description
Disables drawing the stroke (outline). If both noStroke() and noFill() are called, nothing will be drawn to the screen.
```
Okay, fine. Not much of use to me, but good I found it out.  
So let's display the entire time in text format now.  

Wow! So the weirdest shit happened right now, and I cannot explain it!  
I had put the background() function, which specifies the color of Canvas in the setup function, and what
was happening was all the time was overlapping on itself. So if the second was 24, 25 would come over 24, and 26 would come over it too. Just when I put the function in the draw() function, the issue was resolved!

Okay, so I saw the documentation for background function and this is what it read:
>This function is typically used within draw() to clear the display window at the beginning of each frame, but it can be used inside setup() to set the background on the first frame of animation or if the background need only be set once.

So in the previous case, the frame wasn't getting cleared after each frame and so it just went on overlapping.  
Cool!  

Now, let's make an arc of the hour and other functions. This is where the map function will come in.  
```
arc(x,y,w,h,start,stop,[mode])
Parameters
x 	Number: x-coordinate of the arc's ellipse
y 	Number: y-coordinate of the arc's ellipse
w 	Number: width of the arc's ellipse by default
h 	Number: height of the arc's ellipse by default
start 	Number: angle to start the arc, specified in radians
stop 	Number: angle to stop the arc, specified in radians
mode 	Constant: optional parameter to determine the way of drawing the arc. either CHORD, PIE or OPEN
```

So the arc starts from right side, from 3 o'clock, and goes clockwise for its angle.
Okay, so I have designed an arc properly.  
Now the MAP function!

Done!
>let h=map(hur,0,12,-3.14/2,3.14+3.14/2);

Successfully working hour arc!  
The only thing troubling me is my code isn't working for macros. Makes my code unreadable!  
I could pose as one of the most honourable idiots on the planet. Writing PI as PIE takes a great deal of idiotism.
It's working now, and it's better than ever!  

Hmm, now let's move on to actually make the hands of the clock.  
We need the line() function.
```
Syntax
line(x1,y1,x2,y2)

x1, y1 : coordinates of one end
x2, y2 : coordinates of the other end
```
I couldn't figure out the way to move the arms, so I referred to the video. Turns out there are multiple functions
I will need to refer to: push(), pop(), rotate().
```
The push() function saves the current drawing style settings and transformations, while pop() restores these settings. Note that these functions are always used together. They allow you to change the style and transformation settings and later return to what you had. When a new state is started with push(), it builds on the current style and transform information. The push() and pop() functions can be embedded to provide more control.
```
Didn't quite get it though, maybe working on it practically would make it clear.
```
Rotates a shape the amount specified by the angle parameter. This function accounts for angleMode, so angles can be entered in either RADIANS or DEGREES.
```

Now this made me realise one important thing. Daniel's code has start and stop angles in his arc functions in degrees because he manually set it like that.
>angleMode(DEGREES)

The default is radians and that's what my code is using.  

**A very minute line changed an issue I was having. When not using the translate function, my second hand wasn't rotating properly. Just adding the translate function resolved this. Don't know why, though.**

So with this, I complete my clock with p5.js. Enough for today, and tomorrow I'll be back with another coding challenge.
